Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor William
von Hippel. He is now senior research scientist at
Wop, and today we're going to talk about his
latest book, The Social Paradox, Autonomy, Connection, and why
we need both to find happiness. So Doctor von
Hippel, welcome back to the show. It's always a
pleasure to talk with you.
It's great to see you again, Ricardo. It's been
a while.
Yeah, it's been a while. So in the book,
uh, you focus on the human needs for autonomy
and connection. Why did you choose those needs? Why
do you think they're so so relevant?
Yeah, that's a good question. The, um, you know,
humans have lots of needs, and one could focus
a book on any of them, really. For me,
the, the key to autonomy and connection is I
regard them. I regard them as the two most
fundamental needs that we have since we separated from
our chimpanzee cousins. And so chimpanzees, they, they also
connect, but not nearly as strong as we do,
and I think that was the first and foremost
need that we developed when we moved to the
savannah. And then secondarily, Autonomy became more important for
us because as humans, we have so many different
ways that we can be a success, you know,
many animals have just one or two strategies that
they can do to be successful, but as a
human, there's countless ways that you could be valuable
to your group, uh, particularly in today's world, but
even for our ancestors. And so, what I believe
is that autonomy is what allows you to choose
the path that will be most that you think
gives you the best prospects. And so, rather than
doing what other people want for you, you say
to yourself, well, what do I really enjoy? What
can I spend my time really learning, and where
can I make the biggest difference? And so, we
need, you know, we need to contribute more to
our group than we cost them. We need to
bring in more calories than we're consuming, and autonomy
is what allows us to find the best way
to do that. So I see them as the
two most fundamentally evolved needs that since the time
that we left the rainforest for the savannah.
And I mean, what is exactly the social paradox
you refer to in the book? I mean, does
it have to do with any sort of conflict
between these two different types of needs?
Exactly. And so, the, the thing is that, um,
in order to be self-governing, in order to be
autonomous, you have to. Um, DO what you want
to do. You have to pursue your own needs,
but of course that doesn't make you a very
good relationship partner. And in order to be connected,
you need to, to tie yourself to others and
you have rights and responsibilities, but of course, then
you have to sacrifice your autonomy. And so these
two needs are at loggerhead all the time. Now
the. The paradox comes in, not just because there
are conflict with each other, but for reasons that
we can discuss, um, I think that we evolved
to pursue autonomy more than we pursue connection, but
in fact, autonomy is just something that we want.
Connection is what we really need. Autonomy is even
in service of connection. Becoming a better group member
is to allow me to be better connected to
others. And so if I keep pursuing what I
want, which is autonomy, it actually costs me what
I need, which is connection.
So let's talk about, because you are an evolutionary
psychologist, let's talk about the evolutionary basis of these
needs. So starting with connection, how has the need
for connection evolved?
So if you, if you look at our chimpanzee
cousins, you know, they're, they're very clever animals. They
can, for example, discern the gaze of another member
of their species, what that animal would be able
to see from their vantage point. That's way too
complicated for a zebra to be able to do.
But for a chimp, which is a pretty smart
animal, they can do it. The problem is that
chimps are fundamentally competitive with one another, and so
they disguise the direction of their gaze by having
entirely brown eyes. Now we as humans, Um, because
connection is so important to us, because cooperation is
so important to us, we actually advertise the direction
of our gaze by the white sclera around our
eyes. No matter where my face is aiming, you
know, you can tell immediately where I'm actually looking,
which is very difficult to do with the chimp,
gorilla, or orangutan. And so, The, the, the key
thing here is that, what that tells you is
that somewhere along the way, since we separated from
chimpanzees, cooperation became so fundamental to us that I
actually want you to know what's attracted my gaze,
because if, if you know where I'm looking, Then
you can see if it's an opportunity, you can
help me get it, and if it's a threat,
you can help me deal with it. Whereas if
I were a chimp, I don't want you to
know where I'm looking because if it's an opportunity,
you try to steal it from me, and if
it's a threat, you try to run away first.
And so what that shows you is just how
fundamentally baked in our cooperation and connection is for
us compared to our closest cousins.
And what are the functions of connection? I mean,
does it serve specific evolved functions?
Absolutely. And so, you know, the first thing that
connection does, and it's, if you back up a
little bit and you ask, well, you know, what
are the costs of connection? Are there any expenses
to it? Because obviously, if it's free, evolution's going
to give it to all animals, but, but not
all animals have it, you know, snow leopards have
no desire to connect. And so, the, once you
realize that, you say, OK, well, You know, it's
a disease vector, it's a source of competition. Connection
can bring you all sorts of difficult things, but
at the same time, the most fundamental thing that
it brings you is safety. And so, you can
see, for example, herbivores all over the earth. Fundamentally,
unless they're really big like a male elephant, they
want to be around each other all the time
because that's just more eyes looking out for predators.
And so connection gives us that, but it gives
us much more than that because we as humans
can now leverage what connection can do far beyond
any other animal. And, and one of the, like
one example that's something you might never think of
is, is the power of secondary learning. And so,
you know, if I'm a, a snow leopard, to
go back to them, the only way I can
learn to hunt is go out with. My mother
and, and watch her hunt and try to get
involved as I get bigger and, and sort of
learn the tricks of the trade by being there.
But if you're a human, um, all you got
to do is be sitting around the campfire and,
and you may be way too young to be
taken on a hunt yet, but your parents can
tell a story about a hunt and how it
went well or how it went poorly. And so,
all the cumulative knowledge of our species are. All
this cultural learning that we have can be passed
on via these really simple, well, for us, very
simple mechanisms of communication, way too complicated for the
other animals, with the end result being that connection
gives us something really, really powerful. It gives us
an enormous amount of knowledge. It gives us things
like division of labor. And as a consequence of
these, of these capacities, Our groups become, have emergent
properties beyond single individuals, which is what quickly allowed
us to become apex predators on this planet, you
know, in the 6 million years after we left
the savannah, at first we were skulking around the
edges, but by 2 million years ago, we were
already on our way back to the top.
Yeah, and how about autonomy? How has it evolved?
So to come back to my earlier example, let's
think about animals that don't really need autonomy, like
a dung beetle, you know, it, it has one
job to do. It's got to push as big
a pile of dung as it possibly can, big
roll it into a big ball, and if it
gets a big enough ball of poop, then it'll
attract a female who wants to lay her eggs
into it, you know, a dung beetle. There's no
need for autonomy because that's its job in life.
But as a human, you can decide to be
the best, best hunter. But maybe it's not going
so well for you, so you decide to be
the best arrow maker. Maybe you're not so good
at that either. You just decide to become a
medicine man. You know, there's many different things you
can do to contribute even to hunter-gatherer groups like
our ancestors were. And autonomy is what allows us
to make those decisions for ourselves and to pursue
the domains where we believe we have the best
prospects. So that too would have evolved again, once
we left the savannah, um, once we left the
rainforest onto the savannah and became group living and
started to have to contribute to the group like
that, autonomy would have been very important for us.
And why would you say that the connection and
autonomy, because they are the two needs you focus
on in your book, plays such a central role
in who we are.
So, the, it's, it's not immediately obvious, but, but
as you start to think about all the different
things that describe us as human beings, you realize
that every single one of them is intertwined with
connection and autonomy. And so, let's just take cultural
differences as for example. Historically, the East, Japan, China,
etc. HAVE been very collectivist societies, and the West,
United States, Western Europe, etc. HAS been very individualistic
societies. Well, even that's tied up in a in,
in connection and autonomy, right? Collectivism is a form
of connection. You have responsibilities and duties. Um, uh,
INDIVIDUALISM is a form of autonomy. My right to
do what I want and not worry so much
about what others want. And so we have cultural.
Differences, we have sex differences. Women tend to be
more connection-oriented, men more autonomy-oriented. We have religion interfaces
with it, politics interfaces with it. Everything becomes intertwined
with the ways that we connect and the ways
that we seek autonomy, and suddenly you realize that
it's just kind of everywhere. And I had this
experience as I was writing the book where I
just, it just kept getting bigger and bigger as
I realized it was intertwined with so many fundamental
aspects of being human.
And I mean, how does the tension between connection
and autonomy manifest because these two needs seem to
at least sometimes pull in different directions.
That's right. And so for our ancestors. They, their
connection needs were always met because it was just
too unsafe to wander off on your own. You
know, if, in principle, if you're in a hunter-gatherer
group and everybody wants to go south when they
break camp, you could decide to go north. That's
your prerogative. Nobody can force you to do anything
because they're very egalitarian groups. But in reality, if
you can't talk somebody else and go in the
same direction you want to go, you're gonna go
along with the group, so you don't end up
being lion chow. And so, our ancestors, although in
principle, they had the, they had autonomy in any
decision they wanted to make, in reality, their life
was a constant set of compromises, as connection was
so paramount that they couldn't do anything that would
cause them to leave the group behind. Now, we've
shifted to a world where I don't need anybody
anymore to survive. I could drone in my coffee,
I could order my groceries online. I, I, I
could be a remote worker and never leave the
house. And so, we now live in a world
where connection is not only not guaranteed, it's, it's
not even necessary for our survival. And the problem
is that if you, if you think back our
life in the savannah, because real opportunities for autonomy
were so rare. We evolved to grab them whenever
they're accessible. A little bit like, think of it
like fat, salt, and sugar. On the, on the
savannah, fat, salt, and sugar are really rare, and
so we evolved to, to grab them, to eat
them whenever we could, even if we're not hungry.
Better to eat them now because you might be
starving tomorrow. And now fat, salt, and sugar is
everywhere, so we have the opposite problem. It's an
obesity crisis. Well, Autonomy is the same thing. It
was really rare on the savannah. Now it's everywhere,
cities, education, wealth, all these things bring autonomy, and
because we've evolved to grab them when we can,
we're sacrificing our connections every step of the way
in order to pursue something that actually doesn't make
us happy. And so I talk about, it's, you
find what you, in finding what you want, autonomy,
you lose what you need, connection.
Right. And, and we're going to come back to
the modern industrialized and post-industrial world later on in
our conversation, and we're also going to talk about
the concept of evolutionary mismatch, for example. But now,
uh, let me Ask you, uh, in, is there
any way by which sex or gender connect to
these needs? I mean, are there, for example, important
sex differences when it comes to the need for
connection and autonomy?
Absolutely. And so, if you think about the evolutionary
pressures on our ancestors, females were the primary caregivers
for young children for a host of reasons. One
of the most obvious ones is that they lactate,
and so the 1st 2 years of an infant's
life, it, it needs to be with its mother
because it's still, it's not weaning in ancestral environments
till around year 2. And so, females were much
more connection-oriented. They evolved to feel more connection. Uh,
PARTICULARLY to their offspring, but even to each other.
Females form very tight relationships with small groups of
other females, which makes good sense because they engage
in what's called allo parenting, which is a little
bit like babysitting, looking after each other's kids. And
you, you want other women to do that job.
You don't want men to do it because they're
going to be disappearing and going on long hunts.
And so women tend to form these tight bonds
with each other that are actually quite similar to
what we see in chimpanzees and even many monkeys.
And so, the, the, um, there's this tendency for
females to be more connection-oriented, although we all care
about connection, it's fundamental for all of us. Females
tend to care about a little bit more than
males, and males tend to care about a ton.
Economy a little bit more than females, in part
because the male job is to compete and try
to attract females, right? If you look at Trevor's
parental investment model, we know that the sex that
contributes less to reproduction is competing for the other
sex. We know when we look at our mitochondrial
DNA versus our Y-link DNA that we have more
variety, more variability in our female ancestors than our
male ancestors, suggesting that Lots of males got left
out of the mating game entirely, which means that
for them, autonomy is more important, trying to find
a way to compete, trying to find a way
to attract a partner. And so, males, and because
autonomy and connection are at loggerheads with each other,
females' high connection orientation makes them less autonomous, males'
high autonomy orientation makes them less connected.
Do you think that in modern industrialized and post-industrial
societies, I mean, many people worry about and talk
about the so-called loneliness epidemic, and of course, as
we're going to get into later in our conversation,
this affects both men and women, but it It
seems to affect men a little bit more because
men seem to be a little bit more prone
to just socially isolate themselves and spend their entire
time on their computers, for example, social media and
so on. Do, do you think that that has
anything to do with these evolved sex differences?
Uh, I do think it does. And if you
look at how much time we spend alone, it's,
it's a very modern phenomenon. It's gotten much worse
over the course of my lifetime. And part of
the reason for that is technology and all the
available sources of entertainment now. You know, when I
was a, when I was a kid in the
60s and 70s. If, if you want to do
something fun, well, you're not gonna watch TV. There's
only 3 channels and they don't have, their shows
are pretty bad. You're not gonna, um, there's no
such thing as videos, you, there's no such thing
as the internet, and the games that we have
available to us are these pretty simple board games
where you roll the dice and go around. And
so, the, you can't really entertain yourself back in
the 60s and 70s, you need to get together
with others. And so socializing was our primary form
of entertainment. But now that's gone way down now.
And so, if you, if you look at the
frequency with which people get together with their neighbors,
the frequency with which they physically get together with
their friends, etc. TECHNOLOGY has reduced all that. We
don't even spend as much time with our spouses
anymore because it's so easy to have slightly different
forms of exercise, slightly different forms of entertainment. And
as a consequence, both men and women are spending
a lot more time alone, but you're absolutely right,
it's a bigger problem for men than it is
for women, in part because women evolved these tight
circle of tight small circle of friends. Men have
evolved to have a very broad circle of loose
friends, and they don't. Call you and you don't
call them as much, and so you end up,
it's very easy not to get together with them,
even if they're out there and in principle available
to you, men are more likely to not follow
through on that and not get together, whereas small
circles of tight friends demand frequent get-togethers in order
to maintain that friendship.
Right. How about culture, because we've been talking a
lot about uh evolution and evolutionary psychology. Does culture
also play a role in our needs for connection
and autonomy?
Absolutely, and, and the, the key thing to keep
in mind about culture is that it too is,
is affected by evolution, and so you can, cultural
rules can be anything that people decide that they
want them to be, but, If you create cultural
rules that don't make you successful in life, that
make it hard to survive and hard to reproduce,
your culture will disappear, and we've seen that happen
many times. In the United States, there was a
religious group in the 1800s, if I remember right,
maybe even as late as the 1900s called the
Shakers, and they didn't believe in sex. Well, there's
none left. All that we have left now is
some wonderful furniture that they made that that still
survives, and so, You, when cultural, cultures that are
successful create rules that work well with our evolved
proclivities and that help us contend with the difficult
environments that we happen to live in. And so,
for example, if we're agriculturalists and we live in
areas that have a lot of rainfall, they, they
often grow rice, and rice demands lots of cooperation
between people. You have irrigation systems that go on
other people's, across other people's land, etc. And So
rice farmers tend to be very collectivist because they
all have to work together to bring in their
harvest. Wheat farmers, on the other hand, don't rely
on irrigation as much. They don't rely on each
other's. There's no high intensity points like there is
in rice farming um that require cooperation amongst the
whole group. And so areas where people have traditionally
farmed wheat in China are more individualistic than areas
that have traditionally farmed rice in China. So even
though you're in the exact same country. Um, WITH
the exact same language and in principle, same cultural
rules, the ecological demands where you live have an
impact on the culture that, that gets created in
part by virtue of the ways that you make
a living.
It's interesting that you mentioned China because I was
actually going to ask you, uh, cultural psychologists and
social psychologists many times, uh, refer to the differences,
the psychological differences in different kinds of aspects, of
course, between Uh, Westerners or people from Western Europe
and North America, for example, and East Asians, in
particularly when it comes to, uh, us in the
West having a more individualistic culture and people in
Eastern Asia being more collectivist. So, uh, do you
think that those cultural differences also Uh, influence the
need that people feel for connection and autonomy.
Well, those cultural differences give people more or less
connection. So if you live in a collectivist society
that's genuinely collectivist, you will see lots of people
lots of times, you will feel a bond to
those people, you'll have lots of responsibilities and roles
that you have to fulfill, and all those fulfill
your connection needs. But those things aren't free. The,
you know, for example, in collectivist cultures, people tend
to be more critical of others because you rely
on each other. And so if you're my neighbor,
and you're not doing a good job with your
irrigation channels, not maintaining them, I have to say
something to you because my livelihood depends on it.
Whereas if we're wheat farmers, you know, you can
let your wheat die, what do I care? It
doesn't have any impact on mine. And so they
tend to be less critical of each other. When
they live in more individualistic societies, and as a
consequence of this criticism that we see in collective
societies, people also become more self-critical. You want to
fix yourself before other people get on your case
and require you to fix, and they want to
fix you, and so, your, your roles and responsibilities
have a big impact. So you You get this
wonderful, on the one hand, benefit from all the
connections that you that you form and maintain, but
they come at an enormous price. And in fact,
that price is so large that what we've seen
around the world is as societies get richer, they
reliably march toward individualism. They start to leave collectivism
behind. And so ancestrally we were all collectivists, hunter-gatherers
are collectivists. They don't follow the same exact set
of collectivist rules that modern ones do, but they,
they live in a very collectivist world, and now
the whole world is slowly shifting toward individualism and
not whole world. There are pockets of collectivism where
we've seen no change, but as, as people get
richer, individualism is almost a guaranteed consequence.
And do you think that individualism might also play
a role in the sorts of problems we've we've
already talked about earlier when I mentioned, for example,
the loneliness epidemic? Do you think that individualistic cultures
Or let me put it the other way around,
do you think that collectivist cultures perhaps offer people
ways of protecting themselves more from these pernicious effects
of modern life,
or in principle they do. And so. When we
look at data from around the world, and there's
some wonderful data sets like the World Values Survey
and things like that that allow you to look
at lots of different countries and even within those
countries, big cities versus smaller towns. And when you
look at small towns in more agrarian traditional societies,
you find people who have very strong connections with
their friends. They feel a real strong connection to
their hometown, and That tends to be that having
the good friends and the connection to their hometown
tends to be associated with higher levels of happiness.
But even in collectivist societies, once you move into
big cities, you often see lots of loneliness because
once you're in the city, you, even if your
culture is collectivist, you don't feel that responsibility to
people who are strangers to you. You have no
particular roles to, that you have to enact with
them. And so, even though in principle, your culture
provides the scaffolding for connection, it no longer necessarily
provides it. And so we see the exact same
problem in big cities, especially among the educated elite
that we see in the West.
How about the role of religion, and I mean,
of course, I myself am an atheist, most people
I interview are atheists. Um, BUT, um, I've also
talked with, uh, uh, with cognitive scientists of religion,
for example, and they've told me about the psychological
and social benefits of religion. Uh, DO you think
that religion also influences the needs for autonomy and
connection?
So religion is a really interesting. It really, and
this is a really interesting set of changes in
the, in this problem. On the one hand, some
religions have redefined what autonomy even means. And so
for example, when we think about autonomy, we think
about my control of my behaviors. I want to
decide what I'm going to do. But in some
religions, behaviors aren't even the most important thing, like
Protestantism regards your thoughts as far more important, and
God. May or may not punish or reward you
for your thoughts. And so when Jimmy Carter, for
example, famously said that he had committed adultery in
his heart, that's the kind of thing that you
say in many Protestant religions, even though if you're
Catholic or Jewish, it doesn't make any sense. Yes,
you can covet, you should try not to, but
you're not going to get in trouble for thinking
the wrong things. You're mostly going to get in
trouble for doing the wrong things. And so, In
that sense, religion has changed what autonomy even means,
and it's also changed what connection means. You know,
with the New Testament, we see now that, you
know, Jesus talked about, um, he was asked, who
is your neighbor, when, when You know, in, I
think it's Leviticus where they talk about that love
thy neighbor, and, and the person says, well, well,
who's your neighbor? And, and Jesus then goes to
tell the story of the Good Samaritan. What is
it, we don't, that story's lost a lot of
its meaning now, but, but Samaritans were a despised
outgroup at that time and place, and so he's
choosing the most disliked group and saying that person
is your neighbor because that person was kind to
somebody he didn't know and looked out for him,
and so you need to love everybody. Now loving
everybody is not easy, and And we mostly fail
at it, but, but it's interesting that we aspire
to do that, that we've widened our, our moral
circles to try to include everybody. So on the
one hand, religion has changed what autonomy and connection
means, but I think even more importantly, and this
comes back to part of your question, religion also,
it does make people happy, and if you look
at If you look at people who never go
to church and, and do they pray or not,
you see a benefit for a prayer. People who
pray are happier than people who don't. And really,
when you're not going to church, if you, if
you never pray and never go to church, you're
either an atheist or fundamentally one, whether you define
yourself that way or not. But if you never
go to church, but you pray regularly, you're still
a religious person, and we see a benefit for
happiness. But more interestingly, if you go to services,
we see an enormous benefit for happiness, and that
benefit itself is even larger if you're rich than
if you're poor. And so, rich people tend to,
um, you know, they tend to wall themselves off.
They don't need each other as much, so they
don't spend as much time together, and they get
even more. BANG for the buck out of going
for services. So, religion, because God is requiring you
to go to services in many religions, it actually
gives you, it's like an experiment. It gives you
a cause for socializing that you otherwise don't have.
And what we see is that that socializing does
people a lot of good.
Yes, uh, religion can be a very good avenue
even in a modern society for people to form
communities, right.
Yeah, absolutely. And so I like you, I'm an
atheist, and I remember when I was a little
kid, I, I was raised as an atheist, and
I was asking my father, um, he's explaining how
the sun works, and he says, it's basically like
a hydrogen bombs going off all the time. And
I was like, well, isn't it gonna run out?
And he said, well, no, no, no, you don't
have to worry about it, it won't run out
for like 5 billion years. And I was like,
but what happens then? And he says, well, then
it'll expand probably into Red Giant and everyone on
earth will die. And I was like, Well, that
means this whole enterprise is entirely pointless. And so,
you know, once you get dive too deep into
the science, things can lose meaning. Like, why are
we here? What's the, if everything we do is
ephemeral, does it even matter? You know, all sorts
of questions like that come up, that religion does
have the advantage if you believe in religion, you
don't have those questions. Life is imbued with meaning
anyway.
Mhm. And in the book you also very curiously
talk about politics. What does it have to do
with the needs of autonomy and connection?
So around the world, people who are on the
political left tend to be more connection oriented, and
so they're worried about the rights of other groups.
They're worried about everybody getting opportunities, and so they,
and they, and people on the left tend to
be more empathic and so they tend to feel
pain when somebody else suffers. So, the, the political
left tends to be more connection-oriented. The political right
tends to be more autonomy-oriented. Um, YOU know, if
you look at taxes as a, for example, people
on the right are always saying we should have
lower taxes. Well, what do taxes do? They take
my. Money and they distribute it to somebody who's
less fortunate than I am. If I'm an empathic
person who's high in connection, I think, well, what
a great thing. I'm glad that my money is
being shared with these other people. But if I'm
a, um, if I'm less empathic and I'm more
autonomy-oriented, I think, well, You know, uh, you're now
restricting my rights by taking my money and deciding
how to spend it. I should have the opportunity.
I may choose to give it to charity, but
it should be a decision that I make myself.
And so we see time and again that autonomy,
the, the strength of your uh of your connection
and autonomy needs determines whether you're on the political
right or left. Interestingly, because connection is so much
more important, even people on the political right, even
on the far right, tend to we connection. Although
they weigh autonomy more than connection, it's a small
difference, whereas if you get to the far left,
it's an enormous difference in the opposite direction, where
connection wildly trumps autonomy for people on the far
left, and autonomy barely beats connection for people on
the far right, with the exception of libertarians who
um autonomy is a Trump value and, and everything
else has to be sacrificed for that purpose.
Yeah. So how do the, uh, we've talked about,
uh, for example, sex differences, culture, politics, and religion.
How do these four ways of defining ourselves impact
where and how people draw the line between autonomy
and connection?
So, sometimes what happens is that your culture or
your religion push you in a certain direction. And
so for example, because Protestants, for example, autonomy is
everything for them because it's even what you think
is an important determinant of whether you're going to,
whether you'll reach salvation. And so Protestants tend to
be very oriented toward what individual responsibility. And so
that's a consequence, they're more likely to be on
the political right, where we tend to say, for
example, people on the political right believe in fewer
taxes. If, if you want to do well in
the world, you just have to work hard and
find your own way. Welfare is not necessarily something
that should be there to help you, etc. And
so, Some religions push people toward the right or
push people toward the left, but in reality, I
think most of the forces go the other way,
whereas if you're male or female, you tend to
have Um, different value or different weighting of connection
and autonomy, females waiting connection, males waiting autonomy, with
the consequence that males, because autonomy is more of
a political right, males are more likely to be
on the political right, and because connection is more
on the political left, females are more likely to
be on the political left. And so you're, you're
Your inborn tendency to weight, these two traits can
also determine things like what your politics are, um,
whether you are a good fit for your society,
if you're a collectivist, Women are going to be
better fits than men on average. If you're an
individualist, men are going to be better fits than
women on average. So all these things kind of
work hand in glove with sometimes your culture and
your society pushing you around and sometimes you pushing.
Your own personal needs pushing you to become something
else, like become on the political right or the
political left.
So I want to get now more into modern
industrialized societies and post-industrial societies to try to understand
more about uh what uh brought about the issues
like the one I've already mentioned. The loneliness epidemic
and uh the imbalance between autonomy and connection but
uh just before that, do you think then that
in ancestral times and in the types of societies
we lived in. Uh, AND in, even nowadays in
more traditional societies like hunter-gatherers, I would imagine also
horticulturalists, for example, there's a good balance between connection
and autonomy and, uh, how.
Yeah, so, so it is definitely the case that
the more traditional society you live in, the more
small town you live in, the more you live
in ways that are, that are not modern urban
high technology, you have a good balance between autonomy
and connection. You're less likely to spend time alone,
you're more likely to say you have good friends.
When, when we ask Americans, for example, uh, do
you know somebody you would trust with your house
keys when you went on vacation? You're more likely
to say yes if you live in the country
than the city, despite the fact that if you
live in the city, there's hundreds if not thousands
of people right around you who could be your
best friends, but none of them are. And if
you live in the country, there may only be
6 or 7 people who live within 1 mile
of you, but one of them is a good
friend of yours, and you do trust that person.
And part of the issue, of course, is that
in ancestral societies, we saw the same people all
the time. And so, even if you and I
happen not to like each other, we know that
we're going to have to count on each other
our whole lives. And so I'm going to be
fundamentally good to you and you're going to be
fundamentally good with you, to me. And if I
give you my house keys, so to speak, when
I go on holiday, you're not gonna take my
stuff because, you know, someday, I'm gonna your house
keys in my hand, and you want me to
treat you with respect as well. And so the
mere fact that in small communities we tend to
see each other regularly gets humans to behave in
fundamentally good ways to each other. And once we
move to cities and these faceless societies, it's very
easy not to behave in those positive ways to
each other, which can actually make you lonely despite
living in a crowd.
Yeah, so, and in then in modern industrialized and
post-industrial societies, I guess that there are several factors
we can talk about here. Let's start with uh
urbanization and urban life. I mean, what, what is
it about the cities and particularly big cities that
makes it hard for people to have a good
balance between autonomy and connection?
So, one of the major factors is a very
modern one, and, and that is, even if you
look two generations ago, cities didn't have this quality.
We've had cities for 5000 years, but up until
about 50 years ago, cities, there was not a
lot of residential mobility within a city. You'd have
neighborhoods where people grew up and spent their whole
lives, even in a really big city like New
York or Hong Kong. And so the cities had
this, this residential stability, which meant that you knew
your neighbors, and you were going to see the
same people over again, even though you're not in
a small town, you're in a huge city, you
see the same set of people all the time,
and so people form those tight relationships. That's ended
though. We have so much residential mobility in most
major cities, not all, but in most, that people
no longer live around their close friends and family
across their whole lives. They might for part of
their life, but then people move around. And once
you break that with that, that sort of connection
that you have to your neighbors around you, then
you introduce all these loneliness problems, you introduce these
issues where you're not close friends with them, you
don't even know them anymore. And then worse, worse
yet, you don't. Why bother trying to get to
know them? So I live in a big building,
you're on my floor. I could introduce myself and
say hello, and maybe I will, but next year
you may not be on my floor anymore, so
why would I invest in getting to know you
when I know there's so much residential mobility that
I might be gone or you might be gone,
and what's the point?
I've heard some sociologists talk about the concept of
what they call the third space, that is a
space that is not your house or your home
and your workplace, the house being the first place,
the workplace being the second place, and then. The
third place where people would have the opportunity to
gather and meet and uh some sociologists have been
saying that one of the issues in modern industrialized
societies is that these third places have been uh.
Going down in number and it's been increasingly harder
for people to get there. So I, I mean,
do you think that also, uh, what do you
think about that and do you think that might
also play a role here or not? Yeah,
I've not heard that term, but I find the
idea compelling and the main reason for that is
if you look at. At neighborhoods in big cities,
particularly where this matters, there's a coffee shop or
a or a donut shop or a park. There's
someplace where you can go always you can regularly
go there. Other people regularly go there and you
can see people who can over time become your
friends. Even if you don't know them well, if
you tend to go to the same place at
the same time, same days of the week, you're
likely to run into the same cast of characters.
But that can start to disappear with A, too
much residential mobility, and B, if, if those places
don't exist anymore. And so now if there's like
6 Starbucks across your block, you may not be,
and that's where you like to go, you may
not be going even to the same one every
time, and suddenly, You don't have those relationships with
these people, even if they weren't deep relationships, they're
a feeling of comfort and familiarity that, that you're
my favorite barista, I see you every Tuesday when
I go buy myself a coffee and, and read
the newspaper on a, on a late start to
my work, you know, whatever my story is, that
I, I feel, we say hello to each other,
we feel familiar and comfortable, and that starts to,
to disappear if these third spaces disappear. Or if
they become too random, too frequented by an unpredictable
collection of people.
Right. How about education? Do you think that education
or higher levels of education as we have now
also influence the balance between autonomy and connection?
I think they do. And so first of all,
if you look at people as a function, if
you look at their behavior with their neighbors, for
example, as a function of their education level, as
they increase in education, they become less likely to
get together with their neighbors, and the effect is
enormous. People with less than a high school education
get together with their neighbors. Like 13% of them
are getting together several times a week. By the
time you get to people with an advanced degree,
it's a very small percentage who get together several
times a week. It's far more likely that they
never get together with them at all. And so,
why is education doing that? Well, there's a host
of reasons. One is that education brings wealth and
wealth brings, it, it breaks interdependence. I don't need
you anymore if I have a lot of money.
I can hire out anything I might need. That's
one issue. Another issue though is that education literally
is an experience and delay of gratification, and the
gratification you're delaying. Your entire educational career is socializing.
And so your job starting in like year 1
or 2 is to learn some material, which is
good, it's self-improvement, but in order to learn that
material in today's world, what we do is we
do it on our own. You're reading that on
your own, you're studying that on your own. You
know our ancestors did everything in groups and ironically,
really. When we enter today's corporate world, we still
do everything in groups, but somehow that educational journey
is meant to be done on your own and
you can play when you're done, when you finish
studying for your exam or whatever the case might
be. Now, fortunately, some schools are fixing that problem
by trying to have more group activities, group study
things, etc. WHICH allow you to combine your Learning
with your, with socializing, but, but what, if you
don't do that, you develop these habits of thought
where you think, well, my job is to work
on my own and achieve something on my own,
and when I'm done doing that, then and only
then can I get together with other people. And
so I suspect that what's happening as you get
more and more educated, is you keep putting off
the getting together side, because, of course, there's always
more work to be done, there's always uh getting
a raise or a promotion, you know, the kinds
of things that people pursue.
And do you think then that wealth itself can
also affect the balance between connection and autonomy?
Absolutely, we know wealth does that. And, and it
does it again because you just don't need connection
anymore when you're wealthy. And so if you're poor,
you live in a neighborhood that's highly interdependent because
you all count on each other. You, um, I,
I, my lawnmower breaks, I can't just go buy
another one or even necessarily get it fixed. I
have to borrow yours or maybe you can help
me fix mine. We all work together in poor
neighborhoods. In rich neighborhoods, like, why would I bother
you if my lawnmower breaks? I'll just call. In
order, I don't run it anyway. I've got, I've
hired a guy who comes and does it. And
so the, the thing is that in principle, rich
people ought to talk to their own neighbors as
well. But if I decide to go get together
with you, you know, because I, I want to
chit chat, maybe you're going to come over and
bother me at a time that I might be
busy. And so they, they're friendly, but they tend
to avoid their neighbors. They're far less likely to
interact with them. And as a consequence, they end
up spending a lot more time alone, which, you
know, you, you think, well, they're, they're making their
own decisions, they're voting with their feet, they know
what they want, but like I told you earlier,
they don't know what they want. Those rich people
who believe they should go to church several times
a week are way happier than the rich people
who never go to church at all. It's not
a small effect, it's, they're like twice as likely
to be very happy. It's a huge effect.
Yeah. So earlier we talked about religion and you
mentioned briefly, uh, how, uh, being interested in science
might have, if you take it to the extreme,
some, uh, let's say negative psychological effects. Apart from
that, is there, are there other roles played by
science in terms of how it can affect the
balance between autonomy and connection?
Well, you know, I think it depends on, on
where people, what people do with their science, and
so, you know, you can. You can interpret science
to mean there's no point in any of this,
and so, I might as well just sit in
my room and, and do my own thing. But
you could also start with the same starting point
and say, you know, what that really means is
if there's no, if there's not necessarily a purpose,
if we're the product of random processes, and we're
not even a significant product of random processes, we're
a trivially small, short-lived um product of random processes,
then maybe the The fundamental rule in life is
just try to be good to each other because
that's all you've got. So the same starting point
can lead you in opposite directions, and I suspect
it does in large part by virtue of how
strong your connection needs are. And so people who
have inherently high, really, we all have connection needs,
but people whose connection needs are really strong are
likely to, to, their understanding of science is going
to lead them to, well, the best thing that
I can do is spend my time connecting with
others because there's no other purpose on this life.
And people with low connection needs, and, and by
then, it's often, you know, you could even be
on the spectrum and have low connection needs. They're,
they're likely to do the opposite and say, well,
you know, if there's, if there's no purpose to
all this, why, why don't I just do the
things that I personally enjoy and not bother with
others.
Uh, uh, SO, I mean, this is something, uh,
I can't remember exactly if you also touched on
this topic in your book, but then, uh, there's
also interindividual variation to consider here, right? Because I
would imagine that for example, someone who scores very
low on extroversion might not. NEED so much connection
or I mean, or I may, or am I
saying something wrong here?
Well, I would say that introverts need connection just
as much as extroverts do, but the difference is
that introverts don't like connection with lots of people
at one time, and they don't like connection with
people they don't know well because it's a little
bit intimidating for them, because extroverts like to glad
hand say hello to everyone. And so introverts need
small groups of tight friends that they, and connection
with them is, is terribly important to them. They
don't want to be alone either, but not in
general, but, but introverts are more inclined to want
to have some time alone to themselves every day
because they get a little overstimulated by social functioning,
whereas extroverts often have no need to ever be
alone. Um, I remember when my two children, my
two adult children both learned to crawl, my son
would crawl, follow us by crawling around room to
room wherever we were going, and my daughter often
did the opposite, crawl out of the room we
were in to have some time to herself. Now
both have very strong connection needs, but the more
introverted you are, the more you also have a
need for a little bit of downtime, which you
can execute by being alone, right.
Does marriage contribute to the balance between autonomy and
connection or not, and if so, Uh, do you
think that, um, I don't know, marriage rates, uh,
nowadays are problematic in that sense, or,
so marriage is a very important form of connection.
It, it, it hasn't always been that way, you
know, for hunter-gatherers, it was hunter-gatherers get married when
by and large their families stick their oar in,
but they often love plays an important role. And
being married and staying married, even if they don't
have a celeb a ceremony that necessarily marks that
event. Once we became agriculturalists, marriage became kind of
an economic process that links families together and so,
you know, most families were on the bridge, on
the edge of starvation throughout human history, and so
marriage became something that mattered more than just the
two individuals and wasn't necessarily about love. But once
we started moving to cities in the mid 1800s,
that broke that relationship between agriculture and marriage, and,
and marriage started to become more of a romantic
process again. And you can see this in the
United States, for example, which is one of the
earlier countries to start urbanizing where people really start
moving en masse in the 1840s and 195950s into
cities. And that's the exact same time that you
start to see people talking about romantic love and,
and that it shouldn't be that you get married
and then you find a way to love each
other, you should fall in love and that's what
causes you to get married. And so, We've seen
that all happen. We know marriage is a good
marker of these kinds of forms of connection, but
what we've also now seen is that marriage rates
are declining across the Western world. The, the rates
of, of marriage have gone down dramatically, and you
could see. Well, maybe people are just cohabiting, but
in fact, cohabiting has even gone way down. So
whether you define it technically by did you actually
get married, or whether you define it more de
facto, we can see that that that's happening. And
again, that's a product of wealth. It's also a
product of education. You know, when I was born,
women were, it was very difficult for them to
go, to go to university. And so in the,
you know, in the 50s and 60s, and so
women, they, they depended on marriage as a way
to support themselves because the husband would, would get
an education, would get a job, etc. And, and
that's obviously now disappeared. Women are highly educated and
in fact, they're more likely to go to university
than men are. But the unfortunate negative consequences, by
virtue of the fact that they're more likely to
go to university, women tend to marry men who
are as educated or more. There's fewer of those
available. And so, you know, on the positive side,
they don't have to marry anymore, and so they
don't, but on the negative side, there's also fewer
options that are probably making it more difficult.
What do you make, I, I mean, I'm not
sure if you have any formed opinion on this,
but what do you make of the fact that
Um, because nowadays, and I guess I'm not completely
sure, but I guess we see this more occurring
with women than men, uh, because women have more
economic opportunities. Women tend to be more educated than
men, and so that's also why they have better
opportunities in general. Um, THERE are an in there
is. Or there seems to be an increasing number
of women who report uh uh wanting just to
dedicate themselves to their career, that they're no longer
really that interested in romantic relationships. They don't mind
being single. They are also not really that interested
in having kids. I mean, what do you make
of that? Do you think? Oh, of course, I
don't want to be cynic here, but do you
think that, uh, they're really telling uh the truth
about that? Do you think that they really feel
good about themselves in this new sort of cultural
context where they have all of those opportunities or
that perhaps they might be missing on something?
So, on the one hand, I think they're telling
the truth that they, they don't want something that
they don't regard as a good deal, which is
marriage with a partner who's not a good match
for them. And we, we can see that when
we ask women, tell me what's a deal breaker
in a partner, and as women become more educated
and wealthier, they, their list of deal breakers gets
longer. And so when they're not very well educated,
they tend to have a very small list of,
of things that would, that would rule somebody out.
As they become more educated. GROWS, and that's pretty
good evidence that when you're not very well educated
and you aren't earning a very good living, you're
more willing to compromise, whereas as you get more
educated and you can earn a better living, you
become less willing to compromise in a partner. So
on the one hand, that's obviously good. Why compromise
if you don't have to? On the downside though
is that, like I said earlier, you know, women
are more likely to go to university now than
men. They tend to marry as well educated men
or more, and so there's just not enough. The,
the, the math doesn't work for women as well
anymore, with the consequence that many of them, even
though they're, they're choosing to do it because they're,
they have a lot of deal breakers, they're ending
up single, single, and the data show that single
people are a lot less happy than married people.
And so, it's kind of a complicated problem though,
because on the one hand, marriage doesn't make you
happier on average. There is a small subset of
people who get lucky, and marriage does make them
happier and stay happier. But most people who get
married, um, get happier for a while and then
go back down to about where they were before.
We have wonderful longitudinal data that show us that.
And so, why then would it be the case
that unmarried people are significantly less happy than married
people, and what I suspect is, is causing it
is not just the marriage itself, but that they're
making a variety of decisions in their life that
emphasize autonomy over connection, and marriage is just one
of those decisions, and by constantly emphasizing autonomy, career,
things like that, whether you're male or female, you
end up less happy than if you emphasize connection.
Do you think that uh rates of uh depression
that people and the World Health Organization and other
institutions like that are really worried about nowadays uh
might also have something to do with people focusing
too much on autonomy and not enough on connection.
Absolutely. It's, it's both uh, it's too much focus
on autonomy and not rewarding ourselves with connection, which
is what fundamentally actually makes us happy. And then
the downside is that because technology plays such a
role in our life, our connections, we start to
replace face to face connection with these thin forms
of connection that you can get over social media,
and, and they're better than nothing, they're way better
than nothing, but they're not as good as the
real. Thing. And so the end result would be,
I believe that we're seeing increases in depression in
particular as a consequence of the fact that our
connections are getting weaker and less frequent, and so
we're not, we're not benefiting from things that we've
evolved to need, even if we live in a
world where we don't actually need them anymore. You
know, if we evolved today, we'd be more like
snow leopards. We don't actually need each other anymore,
but we didn't evolve today. We evolved a long
time ago when we needed each other very much.
And so even if you don't feel that need
on a day to day level, you actually can
go down this road where you end up being
quite lonely, and that's when you suddenly realize, oops,
I've, I've let my connections lapse. I'm lonely and
I'm depressed. I need to recreate them. But sometimes
once they get there, people don't even see the
problem anymore. They don't know what the origin of
their loneliness and depression is.
Uh, YOU mentioned social media. Uh, WHAT do you
think, uh, about it? I mean, do you think
that social media is a cause of some of
these issues, or it is more of a symptom,
and perhaps people, uh, are more drawn to social
media because they are already, uh, or they feel
already more lonely.
Look, it's both cause and symptom. There's no question,
I agree with you in that regard. But I
would say that the causal role that it plays
is, is not, you know, some of the faults
are social media itself. Some aspects of social media
bring out the worst in us. And so when
I look at your life on Facebook or Instagram,
and you've curated these I was like, oh, why
does Ricardo have so much better life than I've
got? You know, his food looks more delicious, his
vacations look like more fun, because you've, you know,
done a good job of setting up your photos.
And if I went with you, I would realize,
oh, you eat at Subway just as often as
I do, you know, your food is not always
fancy, etc. But the um, I do believe that
social media causes a problem in the sense that
we get lazy, and, and I talk about what
I regard as social media-induced laziness in our social
habits, which has this absurd acronym of SMILS, and,
and I think that Because I grew up in
a world where there was no social media, and
if you want to socialize, you have to go
in person. I think that my generation, um. We
were forced to socialize and that's actually good for
us, and we did in person. And young people
today, they can say, well, all right, Ricardo's having
a party, maybe I'll go, but, you know, it's
a long walk across town, it's kind of cold,
and when I get there, I may not even
know people, like it might not be fun. Now,
if, if it was 50 years ago, I would
go because that was my only option. But now
I think, oh well, you know, I'll just look
on Instagram and I'll commute, talk to my friends
that way, and that'll be fine. And so we,
we replace these, these high risk, not guaranteed social
events where it may or may not be fun.
We replace them with social media, when some of
those events, yeah, they weren't going to be fun.
Maybe the party wouldn't have been a good one,
but sometimes they're magical. We meet new wonderful people,
great things happen, and now we're just not doing
it anymore. And so we see, for example, the
young people today are actually having sex less often.
Young single people are having sex less often than
they were 10 years ago. Now, that's, that's kind
of weird, but they're actually, they've replaced it with
pornography, so they're more likely to be watching porn,
they're less likely to be having sex, and both
of those are kind of this, what I think
is just, it's not caused by social media, but
it's the laziness that social media can bring about
when you're faced with uncertain rewards and the social
media is the easy way, we often choose it.
So do you think that media on the internet
like pornography might also contribute to people uh putting
more of an emphasis on autonomy?
I, I think it does to some degree, like
you can be, because it's so easy to be
autonomous now and entertain yourself, you can say, well,
you know, I'm not gonna bother going to that
party. I'm not gonna bother getting together with them.
I, I have other things that I'd rather do.
Whereas when those We our only choices, we just
did those things. And so it's just much easier
now in a highly technological world. It's much easier
to be autonomous. And so, you know, like I
said earlier, when I was a kid, there were
3 TV channels and they were all basically bad.
Now there's probably 200, and so many of them
are excellent. I could literally do nothing but watch
TV shows all day and never watch a show
I don't like if I get lucky in picking
the right ones. There's a bazillion of them out
there. And so my sources of entertainment are so
common, they're so magnified, they're so good that why
not be more autonomous? Why not just do the
kinds of things I want to do and not
worry about others? And the problem is that every
one of those decisions make perfect sense. You wanted
to see a show that I didn't really like,
and I like my show more, so now I've
enjoyed myself more for this hour and a half.
But every time I do that, you and I
split farther and farther apart until we don't see
each other anymore. And so, the, those individual choices
add up to become very bad when you look
at them writ large.
So we talked about urbanization, education, wealth, science, rates
of marriage, depression, social media, and entertainment in general.
Do you think that we can talk about an
evolutionary mismatch here?
Yeah, so all of this comes together to create
a mismatch, and, and the example is a lot
like what I gave earlier, this, this fat, salt,
and sugar example. You know, it's an evolutionary mismatch
that we have obesity now because we're in an
environment where fat, salt, and sugar are so common.
It's also an evolutionary mismatch where autonomy is so
available, cities provide autonomy, education provides autonomy, wealth provides
autonomy, technology provides autonomy. All those things support autonomy.
In principle they could sort connection, but we're not
using them in a way that really does. And
so the end result is that we live in
this world where autonomy is everywhere, where it's exciting,
it's something that we pursue, and then we forget
that in fact the whole evolved purpose for autonomy
is to make us Better connection partners. And so
we don't turn our attention back, having spent 10
years or 10 number of years pursuing autonomous autonomy
relentlessly, we don't then say, oh, now it's time
for me to reconnect. I've, I've made enough money.
I've learned the skills I need to know, you
know, whatever it was we were pursuing. We don't
reorient in that kind of way. And the end
result is that humans are spending more and more
time alone. Uh, WE saw a sharp rise in
COVID. After COVID ended, we started spending less time
alone, but it's already bouncing back to where it
was at COVID levels. And so, It's just the
world is too well set up to do well
if you're alone. To allow you to survive, to
allow you to be happy enough, but it's, it's,
by happy enough, it's really not as happy as
you should be. And so the end result is
that we're doing ourselves a big disservice in pursuing
autonomy so relentlessly, and it's because of this evolutionary
mismatch. Our ancestors grabbed autonomy whenever they could, just
like they grabbed salt, fat, and sugar whenever they
could. Well, now, you know, the salt, fat, and
sugar are making us fat, and the autonomy is
making us unhappy.
So do you think it's safe to say that
people who live in hunter-gatherer societies are in general
happier than us? I, I, I mean, because of
course they have their own sets of problems and
challenges they have to deal with because they are
more exposed to weather events, for example, and they.
Even can go through some periods of uh hunger
because they don't have enough resources available and so
on, and their, their rates of violence seem to
be uh at least a little bit higher than
what we find in many uh modern industrialized societies.
But do you think that at the end of
the day they're still happier than us?
Well, it's a remarkable fact that they seem to
be. And so despite the fact that they live
those lives that you described, where they're exposed to
the elements, they're not, it's not nearly as comfortable,
where direct return hunter-gatherers who are nomadic and who
move along regularly, don't even own anything more than
they can carry. Tomorrow there's no guarantee that they're
going to have something to eat. They often don't.
They bury almost half their children because of disease
and accidents. And so that sounds like a horrible
life. And yet when you do the, when you
collect the data, um, so recently these Polish investigators
asked people, the Hadza. In these Hadza camps, they
said, in the last two weeks, have you been
happy? Sometimes happy or sometimes sad, or sad. Over
90% said, just happy. When they went back to
Warsaw and asked the same question to their fellow
Poles, they got um less than 50% were happy.
Now, it's so much easier to live in Warsaw
with these wonderful cafes and delicious food, and, and
medicine and all that. It's remarkable, but it, we,
we see that not just in this study, but
we see that in other studies as well, that
despite the really hard lives they lead, Um, they,
they seem to be not just as happy as
we are, but actually happier. And for me, there's
only one possible cause for that kind of remarkable
effect, which is this very different balance that they
strike between autonomy and connection, where they have tight
connections, they're around others all the time, and we
just don't anymore.
What do you think that tells us about the
importance of the social aspect of our lives, because
even if, even those people living in those conditions
that we living in these more comfortable. Societies would
even deem to be extreme conditions still report feeling
happy. What does, what does you, uh, what do
you think that tells, that tells us about the
importance of the social component of our lives?
It, it, it tells us something that that these
other aspects keep telling us again, but we keep
ignoring, which is that it matters more than anything
else. And so when we see the fact that
religious people are twice as likely, are rich people
are twice as likely to be very happy. If
they attend religious services more than once a week,
we, when we see that um hunter-gatherers who have
these incredibly difficult lives are, are 90% of them
say reports that they're happy, not even happy and
sad, just happy. It tells you that despite all
the comforts that we've created for ourselves, we've separated
ourselves from each other too much, and we pay
a price for that with that separation by life
is just not what it should be for us.
And so, you know, it's, it's a very simple
lesson. It's just hard to execute because it's almost
unbelievable. Each time I sit down, I say, well,
what do I want to do? The autonomy choice
is a little bit more attractive than the connection
choice. And what I don't realize is that every
time I make that choice, I'm doing this, I'm
severing my connections and making myself less happy. And
so, it, it's, it's better that I should get
together with my neighbors a couple of times a
week, even if I'm busy, even if they're not
my closest friends, because then I rebuild the connections
that our ancestors had just as a matter of
course.
Yeah, so I have one last question and, and,
and I would imagine this is, this is a
very complex problem to try to tackle because of
the myriad of problems like the ones we mentioned
here, the many factors that play a role in
it, and Even probably others we haven't talked about,
but how do you think we in modern industrialized
and post-industrial societies could counter the imbalance between autonomy
and connection?
Well, the, the problem is that we're busy and
with so many distractions by great forms of entertainment
and so much work to do, you know, we
work a lot, um, with, with so many demands
on our time and attention, we end up being
very busy. And so what we have to ask
ourselves is, how can we repair our connections and
restore them without making ourselves even busier? I remember
reading this article in The New York Times about
this guy who decided to reconnect with all of
his high school friends. And he really enjoyed tracking
them all down and getting together with them, but
then he ends up by saying, am I gonna
keep it up? Probably not. I just took too
much time. I just don't have the time for
this. And so, I think what you need to
do is ask yourself, what's a realistic way that
I can do this? And when I asked myself
that, the answer was, well, let me look at
every single thing I do alone, and let me
see if there's a way that I could do
that with others. And so, for example, I really
enjoyed doing the New York Times. Crossword puzzle. And
on Monday, it's relatively easy and as the week
progresses, it gets harder. By Thursday, it's hard for
me to do. My little sister also really enjoys
doing the New York Times crossword puzzle, and also
struggles by the time it gets to Thursday. Not
as much as I do, but it's hard to.
And so what we started doing during COVID, she
lives in London, so, and I live in Australia,
when she wakes up in the morning, it's now
my late afternoon, evening, she makes herself a cup
of coffee. And if it's Thursday through Sunday, she
calls me on WhatsApp or whatever, it's free, and
we just do the puzzle together. Now, we're doing
a puzzle, which we were going to do anyway.
It's actually kind of better now because we're cheating
by working together, right? So the puzzle's more manageable.
But also, of course, as a, as part of
the process, we chit chat about this, that. Did
you see what happened and what did so and
so say and what political events are happening? And
so we reconnect with each other in a way
that we just weren't doing regularly before, because previously
we might talk once a fortnight, you know, because
we're both very busy people on very different time
zones. But now we're talking 4 times a week,
and we maybe spend, you know, 2030, 40 minutes
doing the puzzle each day, which we're spending anyway,
but we're spending some percentage of that time reconnecting
and enjoying each other's company. And it's been, I,
I really I like doing that. It's, it, it's,
it doesn't take any extra time at all. And
so what I've decided to do is just look
at all the activities that I do alone and
then find ways to do them, connect with others.
It could be carpooling with people physically or just
chatting with them on the phone. It could be
um exercising, you know, if I go for a
run and I don't know anyone who likes to
run, join a running club. I mean, there's a
million ways to do that without actually making yourself
any busier, and it makes you a lot happier.
I find it, it's very effective.
Great. So the book is again The Social Paradox,
Autonomy, Connection, and why we need both uh to
find happiness. I'm of course leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. Uh, AND
Doctor von Hippel, would you like to tell people
where they can find you now on the internet?
Sure, so, um, because I've left academics, the usual
places for finding me aren't as, aren't there anymore,
but if you're interested in the academic side of
my world, cause of course I still do academic
research, Google Scholar has everything that I've ever written
on it. Um, IF you're interested in the books,
they're easy to find. Anywhere books are sold, and
I now have my publicist that the publisher asked
me to set up an Instagram account, and so
I do that and I actually quite enjoy it,
um, you know, just chatting about the events that
I'm doing professionally and things about my life, and
so you can always, um, follow me and see
me on Instagram as well.
OK, I will be leaving links to that in
the description as well, and thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a fascinating
conversation. Thanks for having me back on, Ricardo. It's
great to chat with you again.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windier Ruinnai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.